banniYour addressYour phone numberYour e-mail address(Your agent's name)(Your agent's address)23,400 wordsManaging 180 v2by Bannigan McDadeIntroduction      Managing 180      Management Tactics for the Accidental Manager      So, another book on management. Just what the world needs, right? And why, you may wonder, should you read this one?      There are plenty of books about how to become a better manager by becoming a better human. How to change your mindset, retrain your world view, and generally rethink every concept of work you've had so far.       If you have the time, go ahead and read all those books. While you are at it, go to Burning Man, try some ayuasca in the jungles of Peru, meditate in silence for a week with an enlightened being, and you'll be a better manager. Or better yet, do some solid work in therapy for a few years. For real. I did all those things and many others, and they helped. A lot.      Work on your "soft skills" by improving your communication, becoming more approachable, developing your leadership styles, getting better at delegating, and the long, long list of other things to always be learning and developing.      In the meantime, you have a job to do, and it includes it managing people. It doesn't leave much time for management, let alone anything else, like trainings or courses, or going on a hero's journey to become one with the universe.      This book is about how to be a good manager despite being a flawed human with too much on their plate, which is everyone, by the way. A book that is useful, right now.      My first management role, ~20 years ago, was co-running a phone program for a nonprofit. I got the job largely because I was the best fundraiser. I took the job largely because I needed health insurance. I didn't have any management experience or training. This sort of situation isn't uncommon. It's sometimes referred to as being an "accidental" manager.      I was lucky, though, because this nonprofit invested in its staff as part of its mission, and I was given significant training by mentors. Management training was a part of my weekly schedule from day one, and never stopped for as long as I was in the role. Plus, I was not expected to keep fundraising at anything near the level I was as a non-manager. That is, unfortunately, not common.       What I see much more frequently are diligent workers who are promoted to management without the support of a robust and role-specific management training. They are also expected to keep doing what they were doing before they had management duties added on. So they end up under trained, lacking mentorship, and too busy to complete their management tasks even if they knew what to do.      Studies done in the UK estimate that 68% of managers there are "accidental." An "accidental manager" became a manager not because of formal training or a career aspiration to be in a leadership position, but rather because of circumstances, often unexpectedly. They were promoted because they were good at a non-management job. They were promoted not because they were seeking management as a career path, but because it was the only avenue of advancement available to them. Sound familiar? There's no reason to think that number would be significantly lower in many other countries, and if my experience in the US is any indication, it's as high or higher here.      This book is written for the busy manager who has been promoted without formal training, the accidental manager.       Is that you? Are you used to being good at your job? Perhaps even one of the best? Are you an independent, self-motivated worker who is used to being able to solve all your own problems? Are you the one who "just gets it done" and "figures it out" if there's a new challenge? Is that what's now expected of you as a new manager?      Well, here you go: A practical, tactical guide for how to avoid the avoidable pitfalls that beset every team I've ever heard of. The pitfalls of people people-ing. Which seems to be what it all comes down to at some point. Even once you have all the business needs in place. It comes down to, can the team work together, stay aligned, and scale. This book will help that happen, in the short term. Right now.      It's clear, pragmatic, concise, and consistent. All things you should aspire to be as a manager.      Plus, you'll find that by doing these things, you may just find yourself growing a bit too.      In this book, I give specific instructions for how to "do management." These aren't meant to be entirely proscriptive. They will work, but so will a lot of other, similarly specific, pragmatic ways of "doing management." I'm not interested in debating specific tactics. In management, it's more important to be consistent than correct, so if you have a way of doing things and it's working, keep at it. But if you haven't built out a set of management tactics, or if your set is incomplete, these will work. They've been used successfully in real world scenarios in real companies across a wide variety of industries.      So, without further ado:      I'm going to start with weekly(ish) tools, and zoom out from there to quarterly tools, and from there, we'll get into things that happen on their own timeline through the lifecycle of an employee's time with a particular organization, like hiring, onboarding, promotions, performance improvement plans, and terminations.  Peppered throughout we'll get into some practical skills that permeate all of management, like giving and eliciting feedback.       #VISUAL HERE      Feel free to skip around and read the sections you are most curious about first.       Management is a set of tactics that can be taught and learned.#Chapter OneCheck-ins and 1:1s#      The first two topics we'll cover are weekly check-ins and 1:1s. These are the nuts and bolts of doing management, the most frequent tasks, and the most important. If you can get solid and consistent with these and use them to provide quality feedback, the lion's share of your management work will be handled. Everything else, including performance reviews, builds on and/or supports these two main management tactics. In fact, if you are doing these two tasks well, performance reviews will be quick and easy.       We start with check-ins, with task that should take you about 5 minutes per direct report per week. These are asynchronous, meaning it's not a meeting. It's an email, a direct message, a written report(people still do that?), or something shared through HR software like 15five. You can fit it into the week when it's most convenient, often Fridays.      What: Weekly Checkins - Asynchronous      Frequency: Weekly (did you get that they are weekly yet?)	      Duration: 15 min for the employee, 5 for the manager      Purpose: Maintaining a culture of continuous bi-directional feedback and morale tracking      Time to set up: 1-3 hours      How: The employee contributes the following in writing: A self-rating of morale on a consistent scale, a self-assessment of how they did on their goals for the week, a new set of goals for the next week, any agenda items they want to add to the next 1:1, and the answer to an open-ended question that is a bit more specific to where their career growth edge lies on a longer timeline. This question is provided by the manager.      When you, the manager, review it, you respond with any thoughts or comments you have in the moment(which will let your direct report know you've read it and given it some thought), and any feedback that is too long or nuanced for a quick note gets put onto the agenda for your next 1:1 face to face meeting.      More on this:      There are a lot of reasons my clients will resist doing this, or won't keep it up consistently. Here are some of the blockers: 1. It seems like another task to do in already busy schedule. 2. It get stale and repetitive, and doesn't evoke honesty or transparency.3. And the companion to the above: I don't have the time or energy to keep it fresh and interesting.4. It's not urgent or essential, so it gets deprioritized when things get hectic, and things are often hectic. 5. It's redundant with one on one meetings and less personal.      These are all real things to be concerned about, and make sense, but they miss how these check-ins create a real impact when done thoughtfully and consistently:1. This is a time saver, as it will shorten or even replace 1:1 meetings.2. Only if you don't put thought into your responses, your 1:1 agenda building, and updating the questions as needed.3. Again, this will drastically improve the efficiency of your meetings, and help you avoid some meetings altogether. Also, the thought you put into these check-ins is the work of management. It is doing management. If you don't do it, then you aren't saving time, your avoiding doing your job, and the work doesn't go away, it just piles up. 4. A key component of good management is consistency. This one is related to #1, in that this is actually a time saver, so skipping it won't save time, but just push these topics into other venues which will be less clear, direct, documented, and concise. Plus, parts of this can be automated, so that it's harder to forget or skip when things get really intense.5. It supports and improves the one on one meetings, and allows you to focus on the most important topics, which makes them feel more personal.#      Unnecessary or bloated meetings are the bane of my (and many others') existence. I can't tolerate them, and therefore have done my best to figure out how to keep them from happening as much as possible, both for myself and the companies I support.  One of the key ways to avoid them is to require an agenda ahead of every meeting, and to stick to the agenda.       If part of the meeting is spent generating the agenda, you are in a bloated meeting. Not a big deal when you are small, or a tight knit team. At scale, it's demotivating and wastes your most precious resources.      Asynchronous weekly check-ins with all direct reports are not instead of a meeting (though at times it can be), but to support that meeting. It will mean you have a real agenda, plus context going into your 1:1.      The check-in shouldn't take longer than 15 minutes to complete and 5 minutes to review. I'm not the one who came up with this. My friends at 15Five get the credit. But I'm a believer and my clients generally adopt it and love it.      If you can afford it, you can use a service like 15Five or one of their competitors, or you can just do it yourself using an email template(Though 15Five offers a lot of other added value that dovetails nicely with the techniques in this book).        The check-in ¥ Keeps information flowing to you from your direct reports¥ Informs and enhances your 1:1s¥ Provides documentation of the employees work and morale, as well as your responses, that can be put into reports or inform quarterly performance reviews.¥ Keeps you abreast of performance issues that might be arising. ¥ Allows a venue for a different question each week. #      These questions are powerful management tools.       For managers, questions are generally more powerful than statements. A good question is going to generate far more management value than any declarative sentence. People in business often try to solve management problems with answers when the right question is usually going to net better results.       Curiosity is a management skill to nurture.      An example: Let's say you start to sense one of your direct reports is phoning it in. They just don't seem motivated. On their next check in, choose a motivational question like "What is one goal for this week, one goal for this quarter, one goal for this year that you are(or want to be) focused on?" or "What motivates you to do your best work?" Then, whatever they answer, you can flag that as an agenda item on your next 1:1 and have a discussion around it. This allows you to handle this as a collaborator around how the future will look, rather than trying to pin down explicit examples that illustrate a lack of motivation on the part of the employee, which can create an adversarial relationship.      Another part of the weekly check-in is positive feedback for a teammate. One question should be an optional, open-ended question about which staff in the organization they want to call out publicly as having done something helpful that week. We'll get to this in more detail in the section on positive feedback.      Check-in example:      Introduction      This check-in is a way for us to stay aligned, celebrate your wins, and remove roadblocks. It shouldn't take longer than 15 minutes to complete      On a scale of 1-5 (1 meaning "Ugh! no more please." and 5 meaning "What a great week! I'm in the flow.")  how would you rate your past week?      4      Progress Review      Here are your goals from last week. Please check off any you completed and explain any you did not. Please call out anything I can do to help:      1. Cultivate attention to detail superpowers: Reduce the number of errors in copy by 20% by double-checking work before submitting it. - Completed!      2. Become a meeting magician: Reduce total meeting time this week by 30 minutes by creating an agenda ahead of each meeting and sticking to the schedule. -I did the agendas, but did not manage to reduce my meeting time for the week. It seems like the meetings just keep coming. I could use some help here, but not sure how.      3. Be a social media guru: Increase social media engagement by 15% week on week by posting 2 additional posts on each platform. - Completed. Engagement was up 17% overall      Goal Setting:      Please list 3-5 goals for next week:      1. Earn the title "The Resolutionator": Respond to all customer service requests within 24 hours.      2. Leave my colleagues in awe of my knowledge: Complete the new security training module.      3. Become a "thought leader": Conduct one hour of professional development research to gain new insights on the industry trends and practices.      4. Try again on the meeting magician:  Reduce total meeting time this week by 30 minutes by creating an agenda ahead of each meeting and sticking to the schedule.      5.      Is there anything you will need from me to achieve the above goals?      I could use some help with the meetings. My calendar is out of control, and I'm concerned I won't be able to keep up with my tasks.      Question of the week:#      What are some skills or areas of knowledge that you would like to develop further?#      I'm not sure, but I put a goal in this week to do some professional development research, and perhaps that will spark some ideas.      Celebrate:      Anyone you want to call out in particular who did something particularly good this week? Please post this to our #celebrate channel on Slack      Julie in accounting went over my paystub with me this week and it was really helpful to finally understand all those deductions. Thanks, Julie!#      And here is how the manager can respond to the above check-in, which shouldn't take more than 5 minutes:      Great job getting engagement up by 17%. I'd like to understand more about which platforms saw the most increase, or if it was pretty equal. Can you point me to where we are tracking engagement so I can I have a look?      And I'm happy to help strategize around the meeting time creep. But why don't I help you out more directly by canceling our 1:1 this week.      I've put both of these items on the agenda for our 1:1 the following week. Looking forward to it.      Also, glad to hear your copy errors were down by 20%. Nice work.#      Time efficiency call-out: This one is a time saver, period. It takes some time to set it up and get it rolling, but once it's going you are going to get your best bang for your buck here in terms of minutes to management value. Remember, this can shorten meetings and even replace them.###      Next we'll get into the actual meetings with your direct reports, where you develop and maintain your relationship:      What: 1:1s - one to one meetings with your direct reports      Frequency: Weekly, every other week, or monthly	      Duration: 15-60 min       Purpose: Developing the relationship, mentoring, and process or system support for your direct report      Time to set up: 15 min      How: Put a recurring meeting invite on your calendar for you and your direct reports. Keep a running shared agenda, shared notes, plus a place for private notes. Make sure you focus on team-building, mentoring, and development more than task management and delegation.      More on this: Due to their focus on relationship building, which is a long game, 1:1s will rarely seem like the most urgent or essential meeting on your calendar. This leads to them being canceled, postponed, rushed through, or repurposed for short term goals. Sometimes, busy managers will stop meeting altogether with a direct report who isn't struggling.      There is just so much pressure to deal with what's right in front of you, to put out the  fire, to deal with the emergency, to get to that thing was due last week. Why not push or skip a meeting with someone who isn't struggling or complaining? The agenda doesn't have anything urgent on it. It just doesn't seem like a good use of your time.       And that would be true, if it happened once or twice every few months. But be careful, it's a slippery slope. It can easily become the norm to reschedule, skip, repurpose, or rush your 1:1s, particularly with your direct reports who are succeeding, or at least not failing spectacularly.      There will always be something that feels like it needed to be dealt with yesterday. That's part of being a manager in a growing organization. There is always more to be done that there is time to do it. And, particularly when you are new to the role, it all feels mission-critical.      You aren't used to letting things drop. When you were an individual contributor, and didn't have management duties, you were able to get everything done. It felt good. You felt accomplished, on top of things, and you enjoyed that feeling. So there can be a tendency to chase that feeling of being on top of things, while neglecting the nebulous job of maintaining relationships with your direct reports that 1:1s are so essential for. That job isn't something you can check off a list, or say, "done!"       It's a Sisyphean task that's more like gardening than most individual contributor jobs (unless you are a gardener). What I mean by that is, you can't water your plants for the whole quarter all at once, then walk away. You need to pay attention to them, water them a little bit with the right frequency, and keep checking them for signs of distress.      The frequency will depend on what you can fit in balanced by the need of the direct report. For a new report, I recommend weekly. Once you've established the relationship and developed a strong sense of mutual support and understanding, you can try moving to every other week. If you have more than twelve direct reports and not much time to manage them, monthly might be whats required but it is the minimum.       The duration of the meeting depends on frequency. If monthly, you'll want to take an hour. You want there to be some time to connect, and for some people that requires some warm up.      If it is weekly or every other week, it will vary depending on needs, but hold at least 30 minutes and call it at 15(or sooner) if you've met your goals for the meeting and the agenda is complete. The check-ins we discussed will help keep these 1:1s tight and focused.      I divide 1:1 agenda topics into three categories:      Relational - These are open ended questions about how things are going for each of you. They can be about work or more general, like how was your weekend. They affirm psychological safety, and make space for topics that might not otherwise come up during the day to day course of work. These can build towards larger topics like career progression, long term goals, how the work ties to the mission, values, and vision of the organization.      Process/Systems - These are topics about how work is being done but larger than any one task: Discussions about systems, policies, procedures, and any new initiatives that will impact your direct report's work. Task topics that lead into bigger picture mentoring or teaching about how to work in general fall into this category. Also, any errors or negative outcomes can be discussed here to figure out how to prevent them going forward with a revision to a process or system.  Here we need to define some terms.  What is the difference between a process and a system in this context?¥ A process is the way someone completes a task. It's generally something that can be tweaked pretty easily, and just relates to that one person.¥ A system is bigger than any one role or person. It's a container for outcomes, and contains many processes within it.      Tasks - Either you or your direct report checking in about a task that is in the other's hands, offering support, and holding accountability as necessary. This is something that should be done primarily asynchronously using some sort of task management system, or in other meetings like a standup. But sometimes they will show up in the 1:1. This should never become the focus of 1:1s in general. Perhaps during a crunch period these tasks take precedence for a week or two. Don't let this creep into normalcy and take up too much space in your 1:1s. If that is happening, look to set up other systems to address the issue, and as a last resort set a separate meeting just for task management training and support. #      For the purpose of 1:1s, you want to prioritize approaching topics from a Relational stand point first, Process/System second, and Task third.       The 1:1 is the time that you are giving this direct report your focused attention, and thinking more about how you can help them than how they can help you or your team. If you can keep this orientation towards solving their problems and supporting them, then your 1:1s will be effective and support your direct report in getting their work done with the rest of their time.      That said, the 1:1 is also the time to be giving real-time feedback to your employee about their performance. This will, hopefully, be mostly praise. But this is also the time to let them know where they are needing to grow and improve.#      Let's take a real-world example of something tricky that could come up in a 1:1, and a few examples of how a manager could respond.      	Sam, a newly hired financial and administrative manager at a growing startup, was responsible for all things finance and reported directly to the CEO. Sam was trained by her predecessor on invoicing for existing clients and had that well handled. There was no existing documentation for onboarding new clients, as the previous person in her role had handled the administrative onboarding of new clients but not created any documentation. It had not been covered in her training as it was not deemed urgent. She planned to create the documentation for the onboarding of new clients when a new client was signed, so that she could document the process as she worked through it in real time. However, there was a sales lull, and while a lot of existing clients increased their billing, spurring continued growth, it was 6 months before a new client was signed.       Sam heard about the new client being signed by John from sales, who cc'd her on an email with the invoicing details. She figured John or someone else would let her know when it was time to send the invoice and went on to the next email. It was six weeks before John checked in to confirm the invoice had gone out at contract signing and to check in about his commission, which wouldn't get paid until funds were received. Sam realized the invoice never went out, and immediately took steps to deal with the situation as best she could. However, there was no way to go back in time. It was not a big invoice, and the impact on John's commission would not be large, but it was a mistake that impacted compensation for staff. When John found out the invoice never went out, he reminded Sam that it would impact his commission, and that he wanted to know how that was going to be addressed.      This was a great topic for Sam to bring to her 1:1 with her manager, Jules, the CEO. At the 1:1, Sam explained what happened and how it happened, and spoke somewhat defensively, highlighting that no one had ever trained her on how to handle new contracts and that this was the first new contract since she was hired. It's also clear that John's direct communication about the impact of her mistake left her feeling rattled.  How can Jules handle this?      Example 1:       Jules, the CEO,  is distressed when they hear about the situation from Sam. Their biggest concern is John, and making sure their top salesperson can stay focused and motivated. Recognizing Sam is new to the role, they tell Sam that they will handle it, and ask Sam to forward the invoice and commission calculation to them. Jules will take it from there. Sam seems relieved that she doesn't seem to be in trouble, and they move on to the next topic on the agenda of the 1:1. Jules makes an exception to policy and gets John his commission without collection on the invoice, and meets with John directly to make sure everything is fine. Fire put out and damage control done, Jules moves on to other priorities, and hopes Sam learned her lesson.       What is wrong with the above solution?      This has only been handled at the Task level, with no Process/System or Relational work.       The focus of the meeting was not Sam, but how to solve John's issues.      There is no clear feedback for Sam. Sam was largely shielded from the impact of her mistake, and the message here is that if she makes mistakes, her boss will step in to fix it.      Sam gets disempowered. Sam does get the message that she isn't competent enough to do her job, and is left feeling less confident. She is less likely to try to challenge herself or take on difficult tasks in future. She is likely to remain passive.      Sam did not learn how to avoid making that same type of mistake in the future. It's likely she won't make that exact same mistake again, but there were process issues that were not addressed.      Sam's interaction with John is not addressed, and Sam is left feeling intimidated by John and avoids communicating with him, which opens up potential errors and lack of synergy in the future.      Jules now has more work, and will likely need to step in for Sam again now that the precedent has been set. This will prevent Jules from being an effective CEO if this is how Jules manages all their reports.#      Example 2:      Jules is frustrated when they hear about the situation from Sam. They are concerned that Sam might not be competent and that they have been placing too much trust in a relative new hire in such a key position. They ask probing questions about Sam's overall invoicing process and ask if Sam has checked to see if any other invoices may have been missed. The other items on the 1:1 agenda are not discussed, and the meeting runs over while Jules double-checks all of Sam's work around this issue and related tasks in real time. Sam gets flustered and quiet, but manages to demonstrate that all other invoices have been sent on time and that this is an isolated issue. They run out of time before they can address the issue of John's commission and schedule another meeting with all three of them to figure that out.      What is wrong here?      Here the Process/Systems topic was prioritized, though not effectively, and the Task and Relational issues did not get addressed.      The focus of the meeting was on Jules's own concerns, and not on supporting or developing Sam.      Sam gets disempowered, as in example A.      Sam will try to avoid mistakes more out of fear of being grilled than a desire to grow and learn, which means she is likely to try to hide mistakes when she thinks she can. She will not learn as much from the mistakes she manages to hide, and some of those might impact others without the source being known or addressed.      The other items in the agenda get skipped, and another meeting pulling John in get scheduled, so there is a degree of time efficiency being lost here that will not scale well for anyone, including Jules.#      Example 3:      Jules listens to Sam about the issue and asks clarifying and curious follow up questions. They divide the issue into three agenda items: 1. The immediate situation, (tasks) - did the invoice get sent correctly and how do we handle John's commission? 2. The process issue - how did this mistake happen and how can we prevent it from happening again at the process or system level? 3. The relational issue - How was it for Sam to hear about the impact on John? Is there anything in John's communication that was particularly difficult for Sam to hear? Is there anything that Sam needs to address with John? What can Sam learn about herself from this?       Regarding the tasks: Sam confirms the invoice is out, but is unsure what to do about John's commission. Jules asks if she has any ideas. Sam suggests an exception to the policy, citing no bad debt on the balance sheet and that in her experience clients pay their starting invoices in full eventually. Jules asks her to confirm this based on data from the accounting, and that if it's true, approves her request to make an exception. Jules asks Sam to communicate the exception to John, and tells her to explicitly take credit for getting the exception made on John's behalf.      Regarding the process: Jules asks Sam to trace the origin of the error and asks Sam what she can do to prevent that sort of error in the future. Sam again explains the lack of training and documentation, and this being the first client. Jules points out that those are things outside of Sam's control.  What was in Sam's control? Sam isn't sure. Jules explains that the issue is that a task (the documentation of how to handle invoicing for a new client) was contingent to start when a new client was landed, but there was no system set up to remind Sam of that. After six months, she forgot. How could she have reminded herself? Sam thinks about it and says she could have set a monthly recurring task in her task management software to check to see if any new clients were signed and start discovering and documenting the invoicing process if so. Jules agrees that would probably have worked, and asks Sam if she has any other tasks that are set to start when something like a new client happened. Sam says she'll have to go through her notes. Jules adds following up on the question to the agenda for their next 1:1.      Regarding the relational issue: This was already somewhat addressed by having Sam deliver the news about the commission exception and take credit for getting the exception approved. That said, Jules still asks Sam how it was hearing about the issue from John. Sam gets quiet before responding, and says it she isn't sure. Jules asks Sam to think about it and that they can discuss at their next 1:1, and adds it to the next weeks agenda. They then move on to other topics. The next week Sam is prepared for the question about how John's communication impacted her. She says that recognizes that she struggles with direct negative feedback and that she wanted to immediately defend herself when John pointed out her mistake. She didn't, and instead addressed the issue with Jules' help. Having re-read John's messages, she recognizes he didn't say anything that wasn't true and fair, and that, while he probably was frustrated, he didn't vent on her. So there was nothing to discuss except that Sam recognized her own tendency towards defensiveness, which she is working on. Jules listened attentively and thanked Sam for her thoughtful reflection. Jules noted in the agenda Sam's desire to address her own defensiveness. They moved on.      What worked here?      Jules kept Sam as the focus of the meeting, despite there being a real problem to solve.      The task issue got addressed. The underlying process issue got addressed.      Sam's relationship with John was supported. Sam's development was supported.#      Time efficiency call-out: The best way to keep 1:1s time efficient is to lean into your check-ins. If you can really dial in the asynchronous feedback, you can keep your 1:1s focused on only the topics that really require face to face discussion, and outright cancel a weekly 1:1 if the agenda is blank or short and nonurgent enough that it can be pushed a week. That said, make sure you have at least one meeting per month that isn't rushed. At least once per month, give yourself time to chat and connect with your direct report about mentoring and connecting issues such as their career goals, morale, and how their role is essential to the company's vision. Make sure you make this time with your highest performers in particular. There can be a tendency to skip meetings with them, since they aren't seeming to need help.#      The next core management tactic would be performance reviews, but before we get into that, I want to talk about feedback. Continuous feedback is something that is present in both check-ins and 1:1s, but really comes home in quarterly performance reviews. So let's talk about feedback, and start with the much neglected topic of positive feedback##Chapter TwoFeedback      What: Positive feedback      Frequency: Five times for every constructive criticism (though not necessarily all from you)      Duration: A few minutes now and then to craft the feedback      Purpose: Motivation and staff development      Time to set up: 5 min      How: Create a public, documented place where you and your team can post positive feedback for each other, e.g. a Slack or Teams channel. Get in the habit of posting there and encouraging your team to follow suit.      More on this: There can be the fear that positive feedback will backfire. That if you offer someone too much praise, they will start to rest on their laurels. Or, if later you have to give them critique, they'll use your previous praise as an excuse to not address the issue. It's a frame of mind that there is some scorecard somewhere tracking these things and you don't want your direct reports to get too many wins or they will have too much leverage. You'll lose control and won't be able to hold them accountable. In short, they will get complacent.      There is some truth that if all you were to do is give your team generalized praise and never any critique or direction, that there would be a very real possibility of them starting to relax their efforts. So let me be clear, I am not suggesting that.      But assuming you are skillful and specific with your positive feedback, the body of research showing that positive feedback increases employee engagement, improved performance, and better business outcomes is exhaustive.      Positive feedback, when used correctly, can be a major force multiplier, and lay the groundwork for constructive criticism to land much more efficiently.      Management is getting your team the feedback it needs in ways that it can be most effective. Celebrating wins is a key part of building a culture that will engender effective teams.      	Positive feedback should be frequent, public, and specific. It should also come from all available sources, be documented publicly, and tie to your values.       	Let's break it down:      Frequent: To make positive feedback frequent, giving it has to be lightweight. I recommend having a public channel or similar lightweight tool, that is for highlighting others' laudable achievements.       The Gottman Institute, a research based organization that focuses on human relationships has coined the term the Magic Ratio. The Magic Ratio is the number of positive interactions per negative interactions needed to maintain a stable, happy marriage. The ratio is five to one. Five moments of appreciation for every critique.       Imagine applying that to the professional landscape. Five moments of hearing "thanks for the attention to detail here," "nice work on keeping this appropriately prioritized across multiple competing needs," or "great job hitting a tight deadline without sacrificing quality" for each "let's figure out how this could have had a better outcome," "based on the feedback you are getting how would you do this differently if you had another chance," or "where do you think your process needs to be improved here and how can we get better results in the meantime?" Your team will be much more motivated and able to engage with critiques of their work when they've also had several specific acknowledgments of where they are succeeding.      Public: This a pretty common axiom, praise in public. It lends more weight to the praise for the recipient for it to be publicly recorded, and it offers direction to the whole team about what praiseworthy behavior looks like.       For example here's some feedback for a Data Scientist, Ellen: "Ellen did something that I think we could all learn from. She saw one of our clients post a hiring announcement for a new COO on LinkedIn. She then took initiative to let Client Success know. As a result, CS, who had been in the dark about the personnel change and unclear why the client had canceled the last meeting, was able to prepare for a change in primary administrative contact and show up to the meeting far more prepared to onboard the new COO to our systems. CS will now monitor all client LinkedIn pages for similar announcements going forward. Great extra effort, Ellen!"      Specific: Specific feedback has these three elements: Context, Action, and Outcome. It has a much bigger impact and is much more useful as a teaching tool when these three elements are included. See the example above. Had the feedback just been "Nice work on letting CS know about the new COO, Ellen!" there would have been so much less for the team to learn, and less opportunity for the team to appreciate Ellen's initiative to support another team. This also sets the stage for critical feedback to be similarly detailed. If all positive feedback is vague and brief, but all critical feedback is detailed and lengthy, the positive feedback will get lost in the shuffle.      From all available sources: Let's take that example of feedback for Ellen again. That public praise could have come from Ellen's manager, the Head of Data Science. But it has even more impact coming from the Head of Customer Success, or better, the Customer Success Manager assigned to the client that Ellen helped with. Peer to peer feedback is a huge help for managers, and public praise is a great place to get that kind of feedback flowing. As Ellen's manager, you can then double down on the positive feedback and reiterate it in your 1:1 or performance reviews. Highlighting and synthesizing feedback from others as well as adding your own keeps the feedback more trustworthy for the employee, particularly when they are getting similar feedback from multiple sources. The stakes are lower with positive feedback than with critical feedback, as it doesn't tend to trigger defensiveness nearly as much, so it's good to establish habits of peer to peer and cross-department feedback here. The Magic Ratio applies here, too. If there is a culture of public praise between departments, when it comes time to hold each other accountable and offer critique, there will be some stability of positive regard established.      Values: Specific acknowledgment and celebration of wins, when done publicly as appropriate, generates even more value, if you tie it to company values. It's not uncommon for an organization to spend a fair amount of effort developing a set of values, publishing said values in various internal and external documents, and then never tangibly engaging in those values again. Leaders tend to be the ones who drive the setting of values for an organization, and ideally inspire the organization to connect deeply with the values set. But it is managers who are essential to the effort to bring the values into the day to day fabric of the organization's actual work. And public, positive feedback is an excellent way to do just that. So let's return to the Ellen example one more time: Let's say one of the organization's values is Teamwork. On something like a Teams or Slack channel, you can take the praise and add a #Teamwork like this:       "Ellen did something that I think we could all learn from. She saw one of our clients post a hiring announcement for a new COO on LinkedIn, and immediately let Client Success know. As a result, CS, who had been in the dark about personnel change and unclear why the client had canceled the last standup, was able to prepare for a change in primary administrative contact and show up to the meeting far more prepared to onboard the new COO to our systems. CS will now monitor all client LinkedIn pages for similar announcements going forward. Nice work, Ellen! #Teamwork"       This practice serves as an ongoing and tangible reminder that acting in accordance with values drives the company's mission towards its vision.      Documented: So much positive feedback from peers and managers goes undocumented. It gets mentioned at the end of a meeting, or called out in public at an all-hands or something similar, and doesn't make it into anyone's notes as it isn't "actionable." But as the management expert Peter Drucker famously said, "If you can't measure it, you can't manage it." So why don't we work harder to track and document praise? Both who gives it, and who receives it. Chances are, any significant critical feedback will get documented somewhere, but we are far less likely to carefully document praise. This is a missed opportunity to reinforce the learning and psychological safety that praise offers our direct reports.       Modern technology makes it very easy to store, sort, and pull metrics from various sources. Again, a public channel or something similar can be exported for a specific time period and a search for a staff person's name can pull all the praise they gave or received during that time. This can be a valuable assessment tool leading up to a quarterly review and goal setting conversation.      Cut out: Overall, I'm about outcomes over effort, but positive feedback is the rare exception. Praising effort is more effective than just praising outcomes. While the studies in this area are focused on children, in my experience they apply to adult workforces as well. Praising effort alone or alongside outcomes drives a growth mindset, and can lead to better outcomes in the future. It sets people up to feel in control of their capabilities. Praising only outcomes without effort can lead people into a more fixed mindset, where effort doesn't matter, only aptitude. This can lead to a decrease in motivation and results. So while your critiques and reviews should be primarily focused on outcomes, you can and should still praise effort for effort's sake when given the opportunity.      Time efficiency call-out: Another reason I hear for not giving positive feedback is the most common reason for not doing any of the things in this book: There isn't enough time. And yeah, crafting good positive feedback does take a few minutes and some brain cycles. I often give the CEOs I work with a challenge around this. Spend five minutes at the end of each day to give one person on your team public praise using the methods above. CEO praise is incredibly powerful, and often underutilized. Once they get into the habit and build the muscle, it becomes a favorite way to end their work days: On a positive note, literally.       It not only helps your team with engagement and motivation, it can help you with those things, too.       This one doesn't need to take much time once you build the muscle and get into the habit. The impact on culture and motivation is out-sized compared to the time cost, so this is a great skill to master for managers who lack the time to manage.#      What: Addressing performance issues in real time      Frequency: As necessary      Duration: A few minutes now and then to craft the feedback, the time it takes to have the conversation. Varies according to the severity of need and the strength of the working relationship      Purpose: Alignment, motivation and staff development      Time to set up: N/A      How: Identify and quantify the performance gap, ask open ended, genuinely curious questions about the gap, empathize, co-develop solutions that are within their control, empathize, clearly document the gap and the proposed solutions.      More on this: This is where things get real. This is the true work of being a manager. If everyone on your team always succeeds and never struggles, management would be easy. It's when someone starts to not quite meet expectations for their role that the work really starts. Everything else has been building up to this moment. Now is the time to act, and to use all the structures of management and the rapport built to address the performance gap in real time. Don't wait.      But it's uncomfortable. It's not fun to give negative feedback. In fact, it can bring up a lot difficult feelings and self-doubt. You might feel anger, frustration, or disappointment that they aren't doing their job and now you have to do more work to help them. Your direct report might get angry at the feedback. Or they might feel hurt, undervalued, and quit. These are all things we want to avoid, right?      Yes, but we don't get to. And avoiding those feelings now just means they will come back later bigger and stronger. And, not just the feelings, but the performance issues.      They don't correct themselves, I'm afraid to say.      So this is the time to act.      When you notice that a direct report is struggling with a part of their job, the first step is to really get clear on what the gap in performance is. Is it something that can be measured objectively? If so, get that data. If not, how can you describe the issue as clearly as possible? Is there an expectation that isn't being met that was previously established and, ideally, documented? Try to get so clear about the problem that you could describe it to someone who doesn't work at your company or really understand what you do.      	Then, make sure that your team member was given clear expectations around this issue. If you can't be sure of that, the next step is to establish that expectation clearly, and document it. Make all the feedback future oriented, and set goals for the next week, month, and/or quarter around it, as appropriate. Don't spend time looking backwards, just forwards. If the problem persists after the expectations have been communicated and enough time has passed to show change, then you will need to proceed with curiosity.       Einstein is quoted as having said, "If I had an hour to solve a problem I'd spend 55 minutes thinking about the problem and five minutes thinking about solutions."       When managers come to me about performance issues with one of their staff, they don't just tell me what the gap in performance is. They tell me why they think their employee is struggling. This is useful, but can also be dangerous, because it's usually an educated guess rather than a definite truth, and doesn't include the employee's own perspective. It's likely to capture a piece of the problem, but also likely to miss the root. I sometimes fall into the same trap, and try to use my own training and experience to help deduce the reason the employee is struggling, But I offer far more value when I help managers get to the right questions and the right mindset: Curiosity.      If one of your direct reports is struggling with meeting expectations in any area, get curious. Ask them questions and listen. They might not be able (or feel safe enough) to articulate what's holding them back, but they will likely have valuable insights. If you have a theory, present it to them as a theory, with phrasing that is collaborative, and see if they agree or disagree, and why.       Here's some examples of feedback that lacks curiosity and collaboration:      "Your report was submitted two days late, which is unacceptable. You need to manage your time better to meet deadlines."      "I noticed that you haven't been participating in team meetings. It's important to contribute your ideas and be more engaged."      "The quality of your work has been inconsistent; I expect you to double-check your work before submitting it."      Here's that same feedback with curiosity and collaboration:      "I noticed the last project was turned in past the deadline. My initial inclination is to focus on time management skills, but I'm open to other ideas. Do you a sense of why that happened and how we could prevent it going forward?"      "I've noticed you've been quiet during our team meetings. My suspicion is that you are trying avoid making mistakes, but I'm not totally sure that's what is going on. Your perspective is valuable to us. How do you think we can make it easier for you to share your ideas?"      "We've seen some variability in the quality of your deliverables.  Do you have a sense of what's getting in the way of consistent quality? I've found double-checking my work helps. Is that something you do? Can you show me your process?"      By engaging them in the process of discovering the underlying issue together, you build rapport and create buy-in on the potential solutions.      No amount of correction will work if you don't truly understand why the issue is happening. Your solution might not actually address the true reasons for the gap in performance, but just mask the symptoms for a time.       Also, for someone to accept feedback, it's really helpful if they've felt understood and empathized with first. Sincere, curious, open-ended questions can draw out the experience of your team member, and give opportunities for connection and empathy.       Callout box: Connection and empathy are accelerants for constructive feedback. They will allow the feedback to be acted on quicker and with more energy. Without connection and empathy, it's still better to give the feedback than ignore the issue, but it will likely cost some morale and motivation. With connection and empathy, constructive feedback can actually improve morale and motivation, assuming expectations were clear at the outset. That all said, I see managers really struggle with demonstrating empathy, largely because they don't really feel it. There are a lot of reasons you might struggle to empathize with a team member:¥ High Stress and Workload: Managers under a lot of stress or those who have an excessive workload may find it difficult to take the time to listen and understand their employees' perspectives.¥ Biases and Prejudices: Unconscious biases or prejudices can cloud judgment and prevent managers from empathizing with employees, especially if they differ significantly from the employee in terms of background, personality, or work style.¥ Lack of Training: Empathy requires active listening and effective communication. Managers who lack these skills may not be able to connect with their employees' concerns adequately.¥ Mismatch of Personalities: Sometimes, simple personality differences can make it hard for a manager to empathize with a particular employee, especially if their styles of communication or work are very different.¥ Fear of Vulnerability: Some managers may equate empathy with vulnerability. They might fear that showing too much empathy could undermine their authority or lead to being taken advantage of.¥ Incorrect Assumptions: Managers might make assumptions about what employees should feel or how they should react in certain situations, which can lead to a lack of true empathetic understanding.      	Empathy is a skill that goes beyond the workplace. It can be developed with time and effort. Working with a good coach can help you develop this skill.       So, at this point you have:¥ Identified the performance gap¥ Made sure the expectation was something the employee knew about¥ Explained the gap in a way that is easy to understand¥ Asked open ended questions about the employee's thoughts and feelings on the gap¥ Shared any theories or thoughts you might have in a collaborative and curious manner.       The next step is to empathize with the employee's experience. Ideally, share a time when you've struggled with something similar or somehow related.       From here, you can pause, particularly if the employee's perspective gave you something you'd like to reflect on before engaging in solution-oriented collaboration. Or, if the employee mostly confirmed your suspicions, you can dive into solutions. Again, start with questions. Ask the employee to think about how they might close the performance gap, and, if necessary, direct them towards actions within their control rather than system changes, unless you agree those are warranted. Offer your own ideas as needed, and work to come to a consensus about a plan or plans to address the issue.      	Here, take one more beat to empathize and connect with the employee's experience. This will help the solution take root. It can be easy to skip this step, as it seems like everything has been handled. But taking feedback and being called in to step up isn't easy on the ego for anyone. If you have the time and skill, taking another few minutes to meet on a human to human level here is a real opportunity to build a relationship of trust and mutual support.       	Now, the final step is another one people like to skip. Document, document, document. Make sure there is a written account that explains both the performance gap identified and the solution(s) proposed, and that both parties agree on both. This is the accountability that mirrors the empathy, and prevents the empathy from being perceived as laxity.       	There can be a temptation to skip this, as it seems severe. But if your frequent, public and specific positive feedback is being documented, why not the less frequent, private, and specific constructive feedback? Also, if you always document it, it won't seem severe, just normal. It's when you skip documentation that documentation starts to seem like step up in severity. If time is the issue, it can be brief. It doesn't have to be legal-ese or something that HR can file. Just a few sentences. Performance gap discussed: Expectation is X, Performance was Y, solution is Z. Just be matter of fact, and if you don't make a big deal out of it, it doesn't have to be a big deal to document. If the same or a very similar issue comes up again, you'll be glad you did.      So here's the final list:¥ Identify the performance gap¥ Make sure the expectation was something the employee knew about¥ Explain the gap in a way that is easy to understand¥ Ask open ended questions about the employee's thoughts and feelings on the gap¥ Shared any theories or thoughts you might have in a collaborative and curious manner. ¥ Empathize with the employee's experience. Ideally, share a time when you've struggled with something similar or somehow related. ¥ Reflect on the employee's experience, to see if there is anything outside the employee's control that needs to be addressed in the short term.¥ Ask the employee to think about how they might close the performance gap, and, if necessary, direct them towards actions within their control rather than system changes, unless you agree those are warranted. ¥ Offer your own ideas as needed¥ Work to come to a consensus about plans to address the issue.¥ Empathize again¥ Document both party's agreement on the performance gap identified and the solutions proposed.#      Let's use some examples:      Renata was recently hired as a Senior Sales Associate at a fully remote software-enabled services company . She reports directly to Jesse, the VP of Growth and has been brought on to take some of the day to day sales work off the CEO and Jesse so that they can focus on more strategic work.      It's Renata's fourth week. First thing Tuesday morning, the CEO sends a direct message about a time sensitive sales email to both Renata and Jesse, looking for feedback before sending. Jesse sees the message 20 minutes after the CEO sent it. Jesse checks Renata's calendar and see's no meetings for the first few hours of the day.       Jesse responds: "@Renata curious to hear your thoughts as someone who has fresh perspectives." Jesse is choosing to give Renata the first pass on feedback to the CEO before offering her own feedback. This is a diagnostic and, hopefully, a trust and confidence building tactic.       	Two hours go by and Jesse notices no response from Renata. Two hours is too long to go without responding to a direct message during work hours, especially without meetings on the calendar. She's debating what to do about it when Renata responds, offering some useful insight with a fresh perspective, as requested. Jesse breathes a sigh of relief, but now has some options about what to do:1. Nothing. Just move on with her day and let this go, not make a big deal about it. She could make a mental note to keep an eye on it. The issue here is that mental notes get lost, and we are in the critical first quarter of Renata's onboarding. Letting this pass sets loose expectations for Renata. Actions are louder than words, so even if there is a policy of responding faster, what actually gets enforced is more what will be the reality.2. Shoot Renata a direct Slack message letting her know that response times need to be faster for this sort of message barring extenuating circumstances. Renata writes back apologizing and saying she had to take her new dog to the vet and missed the message. Jesse responds with something compassionate about the dog, but reminds Renata to let her know via text or email if she's going to be away from her desk during work hours. This is time efficient and better than nothing. Renata apologizes again and says it won't happen again. This solution isn't too bad, and perhaps better than doing nothing. But it leaves a lot of gray area in the interaction. Jesse is left not totally trusting that Renata is telling the truth about the vet, but isn't going to go so far as to request a vet bill. Renata is left feeling chastised and a bit less motivated and safe in her relationship with her boss during the critical first quarter of onboarding.3. Jesse goes ahead and adds an agenda item to their next 1:1 called "DM chats" and makes a note in her private 1:1 notes to follow up with Renata about the response time to the CEO's request. She scans and keyword searches the 1:1 Agenda notes and is reminded that this isn't the first time she's had to discuss DM communication expectations with Renata. The other time had been during Renata's first week, had been brief, and had seemed to resolve the issue. It had been a notification settings issue.#      A few days later, the time for their 1:1 arrives, and after some friendly chat via video they dive into the agenda, which has a variety of items on it. They get to the agenda item "DM Chats."       Jesse begins. "I'm wanting to make sure we are still on the same page about prioritization around Slack messages, particularly time sensitive sales-related Slack messages from myself or the CEO. This is in regard to Tuesday morning's chat about Ij's email. I really appreciated the insights you offered, and was glad to give you the floor before adding my own two cents. I know you are just wrapping up your first 30 days, and it's encouraging to see you sharing your expertise and ideas. That all said, I'm curious about the timing of your response. I didn't see any meetings in your calendar, and I know we set an expectation of a one hour or less response time to Slack requests like that one barring extenuating circumstances. Are we still on the same page about that?"      Renata listened in stillness until Jesse finished, then replied, "Thank you for checking in with me about this and giving me a chance to elucidate." Jesse noticed Renata was speaking with a slow, formal, neutral tone and using big words where smaller ones would suffice. She'd noticed Renata did this when feeling defensive. "My dog got sick and I took him to the emergency room." Renata's eyes scanned around as she spoke, and her words became faster and less formal. "It all happened really fast just before 9 oclock, and I hadn't logged into Slack yet. I have Slack on my phone but was logged out and didn't have my password manager access to login at the Vet." Renata paused, and Jesse interrupted.      "How is your dog? Are they okay?"       "Yeah, I guess it's just something that happens with the breed when they don't eat enough. It's weird, but he's fine."      "What breed is he? What's his name?"      "His name is Milo and he's a Shih Tzu."      "How old?"      "Three months, so still a puppy."      "Wow, that's really a puppy. I'd love to meet him sometime, and glad to hear he's okay. Anything else you'd like to add before I respond?" asked Jesse.      Renata took a moment to collect her thoughts. "I should probably have emailed or texted to give you a heads up once I was in the waiting room, but to be honest I was a bit rattled. I felt bad when I saw the message from Ije, but I thought I responded quickly enough for the email to go out in a reasonable time."      "Fair enough," said Jesse. "Let's get your password manager setup on your phone so you aren't without Slack when away from your laptop. And yeah, keep me in the loop about times when you are pulled away from your desk unexpectedly during work hours. Sounds like it was a scary situation and glad to hear Milo is okay."       Jesse paused to think before continuing, "We are on the same page about prioritization. Your dog's safety is more important than quick responses for feedback on a sales email. Seems like the issue was more about keeping me in the loop when you are unexpectedly unavailable, ideally before but even after if necessary. Just keep me looped in, make sense?"      Renata nodded      "Great. Reminds me of a time at my last company when I was late for a sales call with a new lead because my cat knocked my wifi router off its shelf. I was super apologetic, and we still managed to land the sale. Months later I learned the client was a cat lover, and we ended up connecting about the story," said Jesse.      Renata smiled, and Jesse wrote into the notes under the agenda item Slack Chats: "Reiterated expectation of response time for Slack during business hours is one hour or less, barring extenuating circumstances. Renata to install password manager on her phone so she can report any unplanned absences more quickly."        They moved on to the next topic.      Here the solution took more time and intentionality on the part of Jesse and Renata, but Renata is leaving the meeting feeling much more safe and motivated in her relationship with Jesse, while also having clear expectations set for her communication around work boundaries. She will be trying to do better there from a place of connection rather than fear. This sort of interaction during her first quarter will have a profound effect on long term retention. More on that later when we talk about onboarding.      Time efficiency call-out: It's quite likely you often just won't have time to do the full, robust process I've outlined above. If you can't spend the time, here's the short list:      So here's the final(shortened) list:¥ Identify the performance gap¥ Ask open ended questions about the employee's thoughts and feelings on the gap¥ Empathize with the employee's experience. Ideally, share a time when you've struggled with something similar or somehow related. ¥ Work to come to a consensus about plans to address the issue.¥ Document both party's agreement on the performance gap identified and the solutions proposed.      The quick critique on the fly: Sometimes there isn't time for all of the above, or the setting just isn't right for it. Maybe it's a small thing or it just is so obvious you can you just point it out and move on. Do it. Generally speaking, the issue I see is a lack of clear and consistent feedback. Don't be afraid to offer feedback in the moment, and then follow up and see if clarification is needed in your next 1:1. The principles are the same, just abbreviated, and the more practice you get with the full feedback process, the more giving quick little corrections as things come up will get easier too.Chapter ThreePerformance Reviews      What: Performance Reviews      Frequency: Quarterly      Duration: 45-60 min      Purpose: Alignment, motivation and staff development      Time to set up: This can vary depending on your organization, its size, your team's size, and how much HR/People Ops drives this process. It also depends on how much you rely on tools versus building the process from scratch. Anywhere from a couple hours to a couple days to dial in a process.      There is a time commitment to keeping your documentation on your team organized, searchable, and current throughout the quarter, which supports your management overall and reviews in particular. Then there is the time it takes each quarter to sift through that documentation, review the self review, potential peer reviews, review the R&R, and write your own review. Finally, there is the review meeting itself, finalization of the review, any updates to the R&R, and any required follow ups. This can vary greatly. I like to target 3-4 hours per quarter per direct report, but depending on how new you are to the process, and how rigorous the process is, it can vary greatly. Altogether, between 30 minutes and 2 hours per staff member you are managing per month to keep documentation up to date, plus another 2-4 hours per direct report the month you are doing the actual reviews.      How: Here are the key elements of Performance Reviews:      Self-review      Manager review      Upward feedback      Optional: Peer feedback      Quarterly goal setting      Roles and Responsibilities review       Transparent scoring      Optional: Peer feedback      We'll break them down individually, and expand on each in order.##      Self-Review: A set of questions that the employee answers about their own performance. The self review should include all the elements of the review. Questions along the lines of:      How did you do on the goals you set for this quarter?      What goals would you like to set for this next quarter?      Having reviewed your R&R, does it still describe your role as you understand it? If not, what is missing or no longer true? Are you clear on your responsibilities?      Do you feel you are meeting your expectations for your role?  Why or why not?      Do you feel ready to take on new responsibilities? If so, what would those look like?      Manager review: Fairly similar to the questions in the self-review, but a few more and the answers written by you, the manager. Additional questions might be:      Is this person ready for a promotion? Why or why not?      Did this person meet or exceed expectations for their role? Why or why not? Please be specific.      Upward feedback: This is feedback from the direct report to the manager. This can be part of the self-review, and revisited during the meeting as useful. Sometimes this part is separate from the self-review and not reviewed by the manager until after manager review is complete. Questions might look like:      What is something your manager is doing well and should keep doing?      What is something your manager should start doing or do more of?      What is something your manager could do less of?       Any other feedback for your manager on how they could better motivate or support you in your role?      Optional Peer feedback: The employee chooses three(3) peers to review them. You have the option to add more if there are people you want to hear from that the employee did not select. Those peers are asked a few questions about the performance of the reviewee. Questions might look like:       What is one positive quality that stands out to you about this team member? Any specific examples of how this stood out?      What is one area where this team member could improve? Any specific examples of how this stood out?      How could this team member better support you in your role?      Quarterly goal setting: Set three(3) measurable goals for the quarter that are based on outcomes rather than effort or execution. These might be like OKRs, but are specific to the development of this staff member towards their specific role needs and/or career goals within the organization. How these are used depends greatly on how well the person is doing in their current role. There is a starting place for these setup by the self and manager reviews, and the final version should come out of the review discussion between you and the reviewee. Both the employee and manager should agree on the goals. The goals require enough clear documentation for the shared understanding of the expected outcome to be unmistakable.      Roles and Responsibility Review: Both the manager and employee should review the R&R for the employee each quarter and agree if it's still accurate to the role. If responsibilities have increased or decreased, and it seems like a permanent rather than seasonal or temporary change, this needs to be addressed either by amending the R&R for the role(if its more of a refinement or addition to add clarity), or changing the role of the employee to another R&R that better matches their actual work(if it's a significant addition or subtraction of responsibilities).      Transparent Scoring: I recommend a three(3) point scale that corresponds to does not meet, meets, and exceed expectations for the role. What these scores mean should be clearly detailed in the R&R, and the manager and employee need to stay in alignment around where the employee stands on this scale. So it needs to be transparent, clearly communicated, discussed, and documented.##      More on this:      The idea of performance reviews has become a topic of great debate with significant variation from company to company. Frequency ranges from annual to quarterly to always(or never, depending on your perspective). There is also a wide range of focus on accountability vs development.       The trend is definitely away from annual reviews due to issues of recency bias and the commensurate lack of feedback the rest of year.        In some cases reviews are being eliminated entirely, in lieu of ongoing feedback. The idea is that feedback should never be put off, and that even quarterly reviews are too infrequent given the current pace of business. Sounds true, but I've seen managers struggle to maintain clear communication around longer term development and overall accountability without the schedule carve-out a review structure can provide. It's easy to always put off that bigger picture conversation for next week, next month, or next quarter when things will be more spacious. By the time it gets urgent enough to be dealt with there is an unmanageable backlog of unspoken feedback, which is what we are trying to avoid.      I recommend a quarterly review cadence for most companies.      Modern managers of growing companies do not have a lot of time to do reviews, so if we are going to do them quarterly, they have to be streamlined. Reviews should be a maximum of 3 hours of work for the manager per quarter per employee.  Even with that, a manager with five direct reports will be spending two full days doing reviews every quarter. And reviews are not easy work. They are mentally and emotionally taxing work for a manager. So while it's likely a total of only 3 hours of focused time reading, reviewing, meeting, and documenting the review, these tasks can't all be batched and there is a good amount of time spent reflecting between the various parts of the review and even after the review.      The following guide to the nuts and bolts of reviews should be looked at through the lens of the busy manager who often has a full time job as an individual contributor on top of their management responsibilities. I'm going to lay out a fairly complete process. Regardless of how much time you have, I think it's worth it to understand what a robust review might look like. I'm also going to lay out what parts of the robust review can be skipped, and how to make an abbreviated review process as efficient and effective as possible.      Quarterly reviews are not just a time for looking back, but a time of goal setting for the upcoming quarter. These goals should be set by the direct report and the manager together. The review of the previous quarter's goals will often be the largest topic of discussion during the quarterly review process.       It's easy for goal setting to be a waste of time and energy. Goals without clearly defined outcomes or measurability can lead to subjective misses, where you and your direct report do not agree on whether or not the goal was met.      Tried and true, easy to remember: SMART Goals.      Specific: This usually involves answering the "5 Ws": Who, What, Where, When, and Why. For instance, instead of saying "I want to get fit," one might say "I want a 30% increase to how far I can run in 30 minutes within 6 months. I will achieve this by doing cardio 3 times per week for 30 minutes."      Measurable: A goal should be measurable so that it is clear when it has been achieved. Measurable goals also allow for tracking progress and maintaining motivation. Using the previous example, the goal is measurable because you can track your running distance to assess progress towards the 20% increase goal. This generally means taking measurements at the beginning of a goal period, to create your baseline. So I would go for some runs for the 30 minutes, and see what an average distance I could run would be. Let's say it's 2 miles. Then I'd like to get to a place where I could run 2.6 miles.        Achievable: It should be within your capacity and resources. Setting goals that are too challenging or beyond one's ability can lead to frustration and a lack of motivation. They need to stretch you slightly so you feel challenged, but defined well enough that you can achieve them. So, if a person hasn't exercised in years, setting a goal to run a marathon in a month may not be achievable.      Relevant: A goal should be relevant, meaning it aligns with broader life goals. If you're a writer, a goal might be to finish a chapter each week, rather than a goal related to gardening or cooking.      Time-bound: This creates a sense of urgency and prompts action. Deadlines help to prevent everyday tasks from taking priority over your longer-term goals. In the example the six-month timeframe is the time-bound component.      Cut out:Past-Tense: Put your goal in the past tense, so that it is clear whether or not it has been achieved when the deadline is finished. "I can run 30% further in 30 minutes than I could six months, because I did cardio for 30 minutes three days a week for those six months."       Not every goal is going to have clear and easily defined measurable metrics to align with it, however. Sometimes you'll have to get creative. Let's look at an example:      One of Mark's goals as office manager for Q2 is to really dial in the logistics for the quarterly org-wide offsite in June, and make it as lightweight and seamless for the team as possible. Quinn, his manager, is happy to see this goal on Mark's self-evaluation, as he was wanting Mark to improve in this area. Quinn asks Mark how he plans to measure success for this goal. Mark suggests a survey and, after a few drafts and with Quinn's feedback, here's where they end up:      The current post offsite survey gets a refresh and reimagining. A portion of it has questions specifically related to the participants' experience of the areas that are firmly in Mark's hand, and these questions have a rating as part of the answer. Mark also builds an incentive(some sort of raffle where completing the survey gets you a ticket) into completing the survey, as it has previously had a less than 25% completion rate, and reposts it for the previous offsite, which was still pretty recent.      Mark's goal gets updated to include more specifics about how the outcome will be measured: "Really dial in the logistics for the quarterly org-wide offsite in June, and make it as lightweight and seamless for the team as possible. This will be measured by the Q1 and Q2 offsite surveys, which will be completed by >60% of offsite participants for the Q1and Q2 offsites. Survey results will show a >20% increase in the rating of survey questions 5 through 8."      Quinn left in Mark's original language. This keeps ownership and buy-in for the goal, as it was Mark's own exact wording and captures his intention directly. The specificity of the measurement for the outcome will make sure Quinn and Mark are aligned on the desired outcome. The desired outcome is a measurable change in the staff's experience of the offsite. The details of how you get that change can now be left in Mark's hands.      When it comes time for review, Quinn and Mark share access to empirical evidence regarding the goal's completeness. The discussion is most likely about why the goal was achieved (or not) from a collaborative standpoint, because there is a lot less chance of starting off on a different page about the outcome.      	It does take time and effort to design measurements for outcomes of goals and to do the measurement, but disagreements about goal outcomes are much more expensive due to the impact on morale and effectiveness.      Another guideline for goals, though less necessary, is to phrase goals as a completed desired outcome. Instead of "Really dial in the logistics for the quarterly org-wide offsite in June, and make it as lightweight and seamless for the team as possible." the goal would be "Logistics of quarterly org-wide offsite in June were exceptionally dialed in, lightweight, and seamless as reported by the attendees." This phrasing, while still more subjective than the measurable outcomes, is more clear about the desired outcome and what success would look like. Whenever the goal is referenced, it should be clear whether or not it has been accomplished yet. And this sort of phrasing forces a rigor on being outcome focussed, rather than action or effort focused. It forces the goal setter into an outcome and impact mindset. So if for any reason you don't take the time to design and execute on measurements for your goal outcomes, phrasing the goal as an outcome and in past tense as accomplished will help you stay outcome oriented. This is particularly useful for short term goals.      The roles and responsibilities for the direct report should be revisited each quarter as well. There are two things that should be looked at:       1. Is it still accurate? Have new duties been added and not taken into consideration or are their things on there that have moved onto another position? Does it need revision? Outdated and irrelevant R&Rs are worse than useless. The only way to keep them up to date is to look at them together and either update them if it's a small lateral change, or consider whether the issue is that the direct report is not up to the role as envisioned, or ready for a new, more senior role. Which leads us to:      2. Is the direct report exceeding, meeting, or failing to meet expectations for the role? This is both for accountability and development. It's important for the direct report and manager to be on the same page about where things stand. You can have all kinds of different metrics and systems to rate on, or none at all, but things always reduce to three levels: failing, doing okay, or excelling. How you manage someone is very different for those three levels.      The debate still rages on in the correct balance between a focus on accountability vs development.      While I consider myself soundly in the development camp, I am leery of eliminating performance ratings altogether for one simple reason: From what I've witnessed, the ratings don't go away, they just become invisible to the direct report and are poorly documented.      At least once per quarter, and ideally much more frequently and informally, the manager and direct report need to be on the same page about how things are going from a role and responsibilities standpoint. This goes both ways. An employee who is exceeding expectations and doing more than their R&Rs would have them do is in good shape to ask for a more senior role and potentially more compensation. An employee who is meeting expectations can get an idea of what exceeding expectations would look like. And an employee who isn't meeting expectations can expect clear feedback about what is lacking in their performance.       Quarterly performance reviews begin with self-evaluations, primarily around the goals previously set. The manager then reads the self-eval and responds with their own evaluation, which leads to a meeting to discuss where things are clearly in alignment and where there is a gap in expectations.      	The manager review is a continuation of the conversation with your direct report. It's a more documented and robust weekly 1:1 that has a specific focus, not a major shift in tone, content, or formality.      	Before writing your manager review, you'll want to skim your notes from the quarter. This means reviewing your previous quarterly review for the direct report, any private notes from your 1:1s, and all public praise given to or by your direct report. If peer reviews are part of your team's review culture, review those as well. Ideally, this doesn't take long, and you've built your documentation in such a way that it's easy to review once per quarter. Assuming you have a confidential area of your files, keep a folder for each direct report and keep all review-related material there or linked from there. Review this along with the self review and look for common themes. The same sort of feedback showing up twice, particularly if the second time was close to the end of the quarter, likely means it needs to be touched upon in the review.      	Review their Role and Responsibilities document and think about where you see the reviewee in relation to this role. This is the rubric through which you will decide if they are failing to meet expectations, meeting expectations, or exceeding expectations, and will need to structure the review accordingly.      	Where there's a failure to meet expectations for the role, the review needs to be focused on how to close the gap. ¥ What, specifically, about the responsibilities aren't being fulfilled? ¥ What is preventing it? ¥ Does the self-assessment give any indication that the direct report understands that they need to make improvements and where those improvements need to be made?? If not, how have you gotten to this point without them knowing that? ? If so, how do you support them in getting there?¥ Is this a new situation? Has this employee previously met or even exceeded expectations and is now struggling? ? Perhaps there is something going on in their personal life and they have lost focus. If so, a performance improvement plan might be in order. ? Or is this a situation where they have never met expectations? ? If that is the case, perhaps they are simply new and need to continue in their onboarding process and gain experience. ? If they are not new and have never met expectations, you need to think about a termination, or in rare cases, a new role.#      	If they are meeting but not exceeding expectations for the role, the focus is more on what is working and what could take them to the next level.      Focus on the most objective elements of the review, like the goals and R&R. What would it look like for them to be exceeding expectations against their R&R or their goals? Paint that picture for them as a future state of outcomes, then consider how they would need to leverage their strengths and mitigate their weaknesses to achieve those outcomes. This can drive their next set of goals.      An example:      Connor is an experienced office manager who wants to move into a more senior HR role. He's been with the company for a few years, and has developed from being an underwhelming hire into a competent office manager. His strength is a willingness to go the extra mile for the company around vendor relations, and he negotiates significant discounts from vendors who failed to meet expectations without needing to be asked. It's as if he takes it personally if he feels like someone is trying to take advantage of the company. He needs more oversight than would be preferred around anything that he hasn't handled previously. His biggest weakness is that he doesn't like change, and he gets overwhelmed when systems or routines get updated or overhauled with new technology or processes.       Currently, he meets expectations for his role as Office Manager.      To exceed expectations, he would need to be more independent and creative when encountering new challenges. He would also need to be a force for modernization and improvement around company technology and systems. His manager, Eric, thinks the former is possible and the latter seems unlikely, but keeps that to himself. Instead, he helps Connor craft quarterly goals towards those ends.      Here are the goals that Connor put out for himself in his self review:      This quarter I will:¥ Increase employee engagement and retention with a fun march madness bracket challenge¥ Procure a new copier machine under budget and on time¥ Increase job funnel throughput by identifying and posting to new recruitment sites.#      Eric reviews the goals, and decides that Connors first two goals are not significantly different from his core responsibilities. So instead, he contributes these goals:¥ At least three out of three times (3/3) I encounter a problem I haven't encountered before, I will develop a solution, present it as a suggested course of action, and ask for feedback on it. I will do this proactively and independently, without being reminded.¥ I will join the pilot team for the upcoming company-wide password manager update and set myself up to a key role in the upcoming company-wide implementation.#      And he edits the final goal:¥  I will increase job funnel throughput by 20% quarter on quarter by identifying and posting to new recruitment sites. Job funnel throughput will be the ratio of the number of candidates that are identified as being worth a reach out per job posting.      Two of the goals are directly aligned with where Connor needs to be in terms of growing into a place of exceeding expectations. The third goal is one of Connor's own and is aligned with his career aims towards Human Resources, just with a more defined and measurable outcome.       Eric keeps his feedback positive about the past. He highlights where Connor succeeded around vendor relations and other areas of competence. Connor's weaknesses are primarily articulated to him as future and growth focused. Rather than diving into examples where Connor may have struggled with change or independent problem solving, Eric creates goals that address those issues going forward. Connor may struggle to achieve those goals, but now Connor knows where to put his efforts if he wants to exceed expectations.      If they are exceeding expectations for the role, the focus is on what is working and where their next challenge lies.¥ What does a promotion for this person look like?¥ Is there a role defined that would be a natural progression? ¥ Does this person have management interest or potential? ¥ Or are they going to continue down an independent contributor path? ¥ Would they excel in a role that is more internal or external facing? ¥ Does your company culture allow for a degree of customization of roles for those who are exceeding expectations?      Align their goals around the answers to these questions. Set them up to prove their abilities for their next role and facilitate their career progression.      Often there will be a mismatch between when they are ready for progression, how they want to progress, and the company's needs. It is essential to understand their intrinsic motivations. ¥ What is behind their success? What is driving it? ¥ How can you make sure they continue to be challenged, motivated and recognized for their work until their promotion?      Depending on their interests, this can look like mentoring a more junior or struggling colleague, leading a special project (perhaps one they have proposed), or taking something off your own plate with you as a trainer/reviewer. They key is that it is something they are intrinsically interested in, rather than just more responsibility with no reward, so you will need them to be comfortable suggesting and contributing to the goal process here.      The pitfall is that this will often take you outside their explicit R&Rs. Be clear about that with them and document it. They will need to be supported in this extra project and not just tossed in to sink or swim. They need to be set up for success with realistic outcomes and timelines given that this is a project on top of their other duties. Weekly check-ins and 1:1s will help with this. Managers have a tendency to deprioritize their meetings with their best performers. Don't fall into that trap.##Chapter FourRoles & Responsibilities      Roles and Responsibilities       "It's tough for employees to meet performance goals when they don't know exactly what's expected of them.      And far too many employees fall into that category. Based on Gallup's work with companies worldwide, only about half of employees strongly agree that they know what is expected of them at work."      Roles and Responsibilities are fundamental management tools. They create a shared understanding of expectations for your team. Who does what? Who bottom-lines outcomes? Who supports whom regarding what? To begin, you need to define your terms.  Too often, R&Rs are full of buzz-words and synonyms without any clear understanding of meaning.       One common and useful method is the RACI matrix:¥ Responsible - Does the work to complete the task. AKA executes, performs  ¥ Accountable - Delegates work and is the last one to review the task or deliverable before it's deemed complete.¥ Consulted - Provides input based on either how it will impact their future project work or their domain of expertise on the deliverable itself. AKA suggest. If they have the right of veto and their advice is binding, this can also be called control.¥ Informed - Needs to be kept in the loop on project progress, rather than roped into details of every deliverable, oversees      Of course, there are other terms and definitions that could be used, and many versions of RACI-style matrices. but the point here is that you need to be this explicit, and include a glossary for those who are referencing R&Rs.       	The next most important part of R&Rs defining the expected outcomes from the role. These outcomes should be written without any language about how the outcomes are achieved. It should not use any of the key terms above. Ask the question, If this role were to be successful, what benefits would the company experience?       	Let's take, for example, an Office Manager R&R at a mostly remote tech startup. Here's an example of expectations written based on the quality of actions the office manager should take:      EXCEEDS EXPECTATIONS	      	The Office Manager uses their superior organization and people skills to improve and maintain the Company's events, calendars, and people processes with speed, efficiency and positivity.       MEETS EXPECTATIONS	      	The Office Manager uses their organization and people skills to maintain the Company's events, calendars, and people processes with speed, efficiency and positivity.       DOES NOT MEET EXPECTATIONS	      	The Office Manager sometimes maintains the Company's events, calendars, and people processes with speed, efficiency and positivity.       The problem with the above is that it's pretty subjective. How do you measure whether or not the Office Manager used their skills? You can point to the sometimes piece in the last one to frame a difference between meets and not meets expectations, but it's also not really that specific. Is sometimes the same thing as almost always? You could get more specific there, but then you are measuring execution rather than impact, so even if it is always, or almost always, if you are getting the results you want, there is something that needs to be addressed.      Here's the same job, but with expectations written as outcomes:      EXCEEDS EXPECTATIONS	      	Company events, calendars, and people processes are enjoyed by those who engage with them and easy to utilize and navigate.      MEETS EXPECTATIONS	      	Company staff experience events, calendars, and people processes as well-organized, easily understood, and executed according to proactive schedules.      DOES NOT MEET EXPECTATIONS	      	Company events, calendars, and people processes are minimally sufficient, but not consistently well-received by company staff.      Here you are tying the role's success directly to outcomes, and making it clear who it is the office manager serves. Through the tracking of internal feedback via surveys and the like, the office manager and their supervisor can track whether or not the expectations are being met. Specific goals can be set each quarter to move the needle in the right direction. Perhaps company events and calendars are getting good feedback from staff in terms of usability and organization, but people processes are considered poorly defined or hard to understand. Then that becomes an area of focus.       It's also important that R&Rs remain live documents. They should be reviewed quarterly, and updated annually, based on notes taken on the quarterly reviews. Perhaps after a year,  it gets clear that some of the issues that are being called out about people processes are outside of the Office Manager's purview. That should be a conversation during a 1:1 or Performance Review, and the R&Rs can be further defined to make clear who is the responsible party there. Perhaps "people processes" gets reduced to "onboarding and offboarding processes" as those are the ones that the office manager most needs to be on top of, and someone more senior in HR in the org chart takes on responsibility for people processes as a whole.##Chapter FiveRecruitment/Onboarding      Depending on how your company is structured, as a manager, you may need to lead or contribute to recruiting members to your team. Ideally, you are at least given a chance to provide input to the recruitment process.      First, let's talk about why recruitment is important. To a large extent, a team or company is only as effective as the people in the company. Recruitment is the process by which people enter the company. And since retention is never (nor likely should be) 100%, recruitment will be an ongoing part of your team's lifecycle.      Recruitment is your future team member's first experience of your company. From the moment they hear you are hiring, they are learning about you, thinking about you, and trying to decide how much they want to work for you.      You only get one chance to make a first impression.      Your job ad can communicate values and culture as much as the requirements and purpose of the role. There are too many buzzwords that go into job ads and just as many that get used in resumes. Try to cut through all that noise, and simply avoid them. Speak plainly, and say what you mean. Of course, HR and legal, if you have them, will need to bless the copy and maybe you don't have much control there. But where you can, tack in the direction of simplicity.      There are two main recruitment avenues: Online ads on various job sites and your professional and personal network. Use it all.      Cut out: For online ads, you will often get more resumes than you could reasonably review in great detail. My preferred way to cut through the noise is to make a clear request in the job ad for a specific question to be answered in the cover letter.       It could be something easy like "what's your favorite color?" and that will weed out more than half of the applicants, who won't bother to read the ad close enough or go through even that minimal effort of customizing their cover letter. But it won't tell you anything useful about the applicant.      Put some effort into into the question and think about how it could help you determine a values fit.       For example, if you are an health care tech company helping improve patient outcomes by reducing the costs of recruitment of diverse populations for large scale pharmaceutical studies: Put a question in there asking the applicant to share a personal story that explains why they are interested the company's mission.       Not only will that weed out many applicants who won't be bothered to do that extra step before sending over the application, it will send a strong message about your team's culture to all potential applicants who do take the time to rework their cover letter. Plus, it will give you a chance to assess values fit alongside other qualifications when choosing who to give a call.      Don't be afraid to recruit from your personal network. It's okay to hire friends or even relatives, if your HR department or leadership team is aware of the connection. Just don't hire them because they are friends or relatives, and know that you might need to fire them if it doesn't work out(I've had to do it, and it wasn't fun, but we remain friends to this day). You may want to recuse yourself from parts of their hiring process, too.       You need a hiring committee, which is some combination of you, someone from HR, someone from your team, and your boss. Maybe someone else if this role will have a cross-departmental function. But try to keep it to three or four people max.       If you do have support from HR, get their help on the next step:      As you sift through the applicants and select some cover letters and resumes that look the right experience and values to join your team, you want to record your thoughts and notes somewhere. There are a variety of software solutions here, some embedded in job sites. A spreadsheet will work fine, but use what is standard for your company, or what works for you. Mostly, you want a place where you put strong candidates and create a simple rubric to compare them, in a format you can collaborate with others on. Chances are someone else will be weighing in and interviewing these candidates besides you, so you'll want to a central place for you to see each other notes and perspectives.      You'll want to consider what factors are important for your hire.  Experience? Values fit? Location? Particular skills? Then rate them in those areas on a scale of 1-3 or 1-5.      [Insert TABLE]      It's great if someone else from your hiring committee also goes through the applicants and gives their own ratings.      Now you need to determine who gets interviewed. How many people you interview will have to do with your bandwidth. You need to consider some of these candidates won't live up to their resumes at all, and others will be so good that they will get another job offer and take it before you finish your process. So I recommend having at least five candidates in the initial interview pipeline, if you have that many potentially qualified applicants.      Ideally, from the time an applicant applies to the time they receive a job offer is less than three weeks. The best candidates will get hired fast, and if you aren't doing it, someone else is.       Assuming it takes a week from when an applicant applies until their resume and cover letter gets read, rated, and approved for interview, we are talking two weeks left for them to go through up to four interviews. That's a tight schedule, and will take proactive scheduling. This requires getting your hiring committee on board with blocking off parts of their schedule for potential interviews, so you can schedule candidates into those slots without a lot of back and forth.      You want make sure your hiring committee is coordinated in who is going to ask which questions. As a candidate for a C-level position at a well known business coaching company that has been around for more than 40 years, I was asked the same (relatively bland) question in two separate interviews by two of my would be peers. It was clear that the second interviewer hadn't had the time, habit, or desire to review notes from the previous interviewer, and that told me a lot about the company's internal systems and organization. I ended up walking away from the job offer(not for that reason alone, but it didn't help their case).       There are lot of note taking or interview coordination software solutions, but all you really need is a shared document that everyone on the hiring committee can takes notes into. You need to take good notes during interviews. Maybe it slows down the interview, but that's fine. Just be transparent, let the candidate know you are taking notes.       If you have support from HR, have them do the first round of interviews. If not, you will need to do it. Start out by explaining the interview process expectations. Let them know who is on the hiring committee and how many interviews there will be, and when you plan to have a decision by.       You want to ask a question for each area of competency on your chart, and see if they are living up to your expectations based on their resume and cover letter. You can then add a fresh set of scores based on the interview. You also want to give them time to ask some questions, and note both their questions and your answers in the shared notes.      The other interviews can be more focused on the area of competency that most overlaps with the interviewer's area of expertise. HR on culture fit, your team member on technical expertise(can they do the job), and your boss on values alignment, for example.      You'll want to let people know when they are no longer being considered for the role.       You can send a simple email like:      Subject: Re: Your Application for [Job Title] - Update on the Process      Dear [Candidate's Name],      I hope this message finds you well. I am reaching out regarding the status of your application for the [Job Title] role at [Company Name].      We appreciate the time and effort you dedicated to the application and interview process. Your qualifications and enthusiasm are commendable and certainly made our decision challenging. After a careful review and consideration of all candidates, we regret to inform you that we have decided to move forward with another candidate for this particular role.      This decision was not a reflection of your abilities or experience but was based on the specific needs of the role at this time. We were impressed with your qualifications, and we genuinely hope this decision does not deter you from applying for future positions at [Company Name] that align with your skills and experiences.       We encourage you to keep an eye on our career page.      We greatly appreciate your interest in [Company Name] and wish you the best of luck in your job search.       Best Regards,      [Your Name] [Your Title] [Your Email] [Your Contact Information]#      Be sure to check references. This can take time, so I would start the process for anyone who makes it through the second interview. This may be handled by someone in HR, but if it falls to you, here's some guidance:#      Cut out: Another reason to put effort into a fast and effective recruitment process is how it impacts you and your team. If you and your team have the sense that you are capable of finding and strong candidates, it helps you hold your team accountable. You know that if someone decides to leave, you can handle it.##      The most important work of onboarding a new team member happens before their first day. Review the R&R and make sure it's accurate and up to date, and that the expectations are tied to outcomes. That's the destination. Now you need to build the road map. Start with a 30, 60, 90 day plan.      The first 90 days of a new hire is extremely important. You only get one chance to make a first impression, and this is that chance. You are establishing the baseline of your company's culture for this staff member. How they experience the first 90 days has an outsized impact on retention for the first three years of employment. You want to make sure you get this right.      You want your new employee to experience their new company as impressive. You want them to feel like they are going to have to bring their 'A' game to fit in. That means they need to know expectations at the outset, and those expectations need to be clear, achievable, and challenging.       To build a culture of ownership where you will be able to truly delegate to your direct reports, you need to tie their 90 day milestones to outcomes, not just actions. Your company is judged by its outcomes. It doesn't matter how many outbound sales emails you sent, potential new clients you identified, or meetings you scheduled. In the end, all that matters is how many sales closed and how much you got paid vs your costs. You need to create a similar level of accountability at the role level. Let's look at some quick examples:      If you hired a new growth specialist whose job it is to prospect for outbound sales, how do you quantify the output? The number of qualified meetings set for their sales team, not number of attempts made.      For a new account manager, it's about total billing for their client load, retention, and some sort of client satisfaction score. Perhaps an upsell component.      Have three ranges for these outcomes at the 90 day mark. Does not meet, meets, and exceeds expectations.  These should tie to the R&R for the role, but be appropriate for the new hire's brief tenure.       If you have the R&R and a 90 day target, the next step is scheduling out the first few weeks for the new hire in terms of mentoring, shadowing, training, and administrative onboarding.       Particularly in remote or remote hybrid situations, you want to make sure the new hire is getting at least 3-4 hours of in person or video meetings with fellow staff. If there is sufficient budget, flying the new hire to be in person with their manager for 7-14 days of their first 30 is well worth it. This is even possible when the manager works from home, with some planning.      During their first meeting with any staff, there should be a specific agenda item for introductions that allows them to start to get to know their fellow employees, in addition to any training covered.       You want to avoid long stretches of time where the new hire is expected to "orient themselves" by reading through employee handbooks and the like. Instead, they should have a meeting scheduled with someone from HR or administration to review the handbook and answer any questions, and be asked to have reviewed it ahead of the meeting. Then block off an appropriate amount of time for that review in their schedule ahead of the meeting.      The effort to get them rolling with efficient use of time during this critical period will set the right pace and tone for their work. You won't be managing their calendar this closely after the first few weeks.      During the first week, meet with the new hire to review the R&R and talk about the 90 day outcome targets. Work with them to establish milestones for the 30 and 60 mark that will keep them on track, again with the does not meet, meets, and exceeds expectation ranges. Let them lead this process as much as possible, using questions to keep them on track rather than doing this for them. "Is this rigorous enough to feel confident we'll be on track for the 90 day mark?" Ask them what their personal work-related goals are for the first 90 days, and add them to this 30 60 90 day plan, also with three milestones and three levels of outcomes(does not meet, meets, and exceeds, or whatever language you prefer).      Return to this plan every week during your 1:1 and make notes about progress.      Eventually the expectations for the role will match the R&R. For some roles, particularly brand new roles, it may take a year to really start to have the full impact envisioned for the position. For other roles, like the aforementioned growth specialist doing outbound sales prospecting, three to four months is often enough to start being a full contributor to outcomes, but even that will vary by industry and season.##Chapter SixNew team      Taking over management of an existing team:      *break down into chart with meeting schedules and sample agendas.      Take the time to meet with each individual. Start by asking open ended questions. Any questions you have about the team, it's purpose, it goals. Be curious and ask real questions.       When I came in as an interim head of People Ops for a rapidly scaling startup, there wasn't much clarity or consensus about the name People Ops meant, or even if it was the right name for the division. Ultimately, that was going to be for me to define with the CEO and other leaders, but I used that lack of clarity as an in with my new team.       In my first one on one with each of them, I asked them what they thought the teams purpose and scope was, and what it should be. I also asked them if the name was appropriate and if they had any ideas for new names. And finally, I asked them who the leader had been before me, as the position had been vacant for some time, and I was curious who the team saw as the de facto leader(s).  I got a wide variety of answers, and learned a lot about how the team thought. I also built a sense of collaboration from the get go.       	Then, in a second meeting, the following week, you can do more of the sharing, letting them know expectations around meeting cadence and the like. Ahead of this meeting, review their last performance review and roles and responsibilities. Ask them to do the same, and review together in the meeting. This will bring you up to speed on their goals for the quarter, and you can get an update on how they are progressing on them.#      Being promoted over your peers      You may find yourself managing a team of people that were, until a few days ago, your colleagues. Perhaps some of them also applied for the management position that you were promoted to. This can be challenging to navigate as far as social dynamics go, but it has many potential benefits as well.       For example, you will know your team's strengths and weaknesses better than a manager who didn't have the chance to work side by side with them. Make a list of each of your reports and identify where they do their best work. Then find or create opportunities to celebrate them for these strengths. This will help diffuse any lingering resentments or feelings of being passed over.      *examples#Chapter SevenTerminations      How do you know it's time to let someone go?      Firing people is the worst part of being a manager. It's never easy. It's often gut-wrenching. It can bring up a lot of self-doubt, self-consciousness, and pretty much the full spectrum of difficult feelings. Fear, anger, sadness. It's not easy to tell someone they no longer have a job, especially when it is your call.      Not to mention, who is going to do the work when they are gone? Who is going to hire a replacement? Who has time for all that? Even a poor performing employee is often better than no one in the role, at least in the short term.      So, quite understandably, we, as managers, avoid letting people go if they can get away with it.      We find ways to make excuses or exceptions for the employee in question, and give them or their work extra attention to bring it up to a level that won't do serious damage to the company. Or perhaps the employee's teammates pick up the slack, and the whole team is complicit in carrying the under performer.      Or we move the struggling employee around from position to position within the company to see where they might be a fit. There is the rare case where this ends up working (strong values fit, but mismatched skill set for the current position), but it's not a great habit to form.       Spend more time thinking about how to position your top performer to excel than how to position your lowest performer so you don't have to fire them.      Most often, despite all of the above attempts at retention, the employee doesn't ultimately work out, and you have to let them go anyways. If you are lucky, they quit before you have to fire them, but the damage is already done.      All the extra focus on the worst performer has drained the whole team of morale and productivity. Some of your best performers, who were being ignored while their manager focused on the lowest performers, may find other opportunities at other companies where their potential will be nurtured.      Whenever a manager I'm coaching is struggling with a taking action on a needed termination, I talk about something I learned when I studied group dynamics while getting my Master's in Counseling Psychology: The difference between a process-oriented group and task-focused  group#1. Process-Oriented Group:¥ Objective: The primary goal is to focus on the development, dynamics, and interpersonal relationships within the group. It's more about the journey than the destination.¥ Activities: These groups often engage in activities that enhance group cohesion, communication skills, and emotional understanding. They might involve discussions, role-playing, or reflection exercises.¥ Example: Therapy groups, self-awareness groups, or team-building retreats where the main focus is on how members interact and develop as a group.2. Task-Focused Group:¥ Objective: The primary goal is to accomplish a specific task or set of tasks. The success of the group is measured by the completion and quality of the task.¥ Activities: These groups focus on planning, executing, and completing specific tasks or projects. This might involve setting goals, delegating tasks, and problem-solving.¥ Example: Project teams in a workplace, study groups, or committees formed to organize an event, where the main focus is on achieving a tangible outcome or goal.#      Remember that your team is a task-focused group, not a process-oriented group. It's primary function is not the well-being of it's members, but the outcome they produce. There are process-oriented groups that we can belong to, and hopefully our families and friend groups offer a focus on the relationship more than the outcome. But business relationships are explicitly task-focused, and to pretend they are not is not only incorrect, but irresponsible.#      Recognize the signs that it's time to let someone go, and take steps to force the issue one way or the other before it drags on too long.      So here are some indications it's likely time let someone go:¥ You are often making exceptions for them.¥ They are consistently failing to hit their goals¥ They are not receptive to feedback about their performance¥ They are not taking advantage of opportunities for training or development¥ They are not meeting the expectations defined for their role¥ You are spending more time trying to solve their problems than anyone else on your team¥ They repeatedly violate policies¥ They don't adapt to changes in the company, new technologies, or strategies¥ They are dishonest, lie, steal or breach trust in a some equally obvious way.¥ They generally can't be trusted to do what they say they are going to do when they say they will do it¥ They frequently bring down team morale with a poor attitude, a tendency towards unnecessary conflict, or other disruptive behavior #      Cut out: One of the better ways to determine if it's time let someone go, I learned from a manager during a training I was facilitating: Most team members are some combination of fast/on time with their work, expert/high quality with their work, and/or a good teammate/easy to work with. You want everyone on your team to have at least two of these qualities. If it's only one, you should let them go.      If you have an HR/People Ops department, you want to clue them in as soon as you start thinking you're going to have to let someone go. They will let you know if there are any internal policies, processes, or legal hoops you need to jump through. Legal requirements for terminations vary by country, state, etc. That's all beyond the scope of this book, except to say, find out what the requirements are sooner than later, as some of them engender a specific process in the months leading up to a termination.      If you are at this stage, I'm going to assume a few things have happened:¥ You've documented a clear mutual understanding of expectations for the employee in question within a specific timeline¥ You've documented the employee's failure to meet those expectations within the allotted timeline      If the above isn't true, the next step is to make it true. See the sections on goal setting, feedback, and roles & responsibilities for more on how to make it true.      I'll wait here until you are back. All set? Okay.       If the employee has some tenure, you can consider a Performance Improvement Plan(PIP). This is something Human Resources(HR)/People Ops should be able to help you with. That said, should doesn't mean will, so let's pretend you don't have a seasoned and well-funded HR department and you need to figure this out on your own if you want it to happen. I know, hard to imagine, right?      A PIP is for an employee who used to be good at their job, but who's performance has been suffering. They have more than a year of tenure with the company. Until the recent dip in performance, they were fairly consistently meeting or exceeding the expectations set for them.       A PIP is not for an employee who has less than a year of tenure. It's not for an employee who has never had a year long period of meeting expectations.       A PIP might be a good fit an employee who has struggled to meet expectations for a new position in the company, but who succeeded at another position. A PIP might be a good fit for an employee who has a new manager who is setting a more clear bar of expectations than the previous manager, and is struggling to adjust.      A PIP is a sincere attempt to get the employee the structure and resources they need to succeed in their role.       A PIP is not the first step in a termination process. If you are using it that way, you are wasting everyone's time and energy. Just go ahead and let them go.      A PIP isn't fundamentally different from the typical goal setting and feedback methods discussed in those sections of this book. It still requires collaboration, documentation, follow up, support for the employee, a clear timeline, etc. It has a few specifications:¥ The timeline is a maximum of three months to meet to expectations¥ Make it clear to all involved that this is a cusp. If performance doesn't improve to meet expectations, the employee will no longer continue in the current role, and will need to find another job(either within the organization or somewhere else).¥ The documentation should be robust and precise, with the employee's signature denoting that they are clear on the plan.#      An example:      Performance Improvement Plan for [Employee's Name]      Date: __________________      Position: Sales Representative      Department: Sales      Performance Issue: Employee has not met the sales target for the last three consecutive months.      Plan Duration: This PIP will last 90 days, beginning from the date of this document and ending on _____________.      Performance Expectations and Goals:¥ Meet the monthly sales target of $25,000 by end of the first PIP month, progressively increasing to $30,000 by the end of the PIP.¥ Improve weekly call frequency to at least 100 customer interactions per week.¥ Attend and actively participate in all sales training sessions and team meetings.      Support and Resources:¥ Weekly one-on-one coaching sessions with the sales manager.¥ Additional training on product knowledge and sales techniques.¥ Access to customer relationship management (CRM) software and sales materials.#      Progress Assessment:¥ Weekly review meetings with the sales manager to assess progress and provide feedback.¥ Formal evaluation after 30, 60, and 90 days to review achievement of performance goals.      Consequences:      If, at the end of the 90 day period, the outcomes and actions don't align with the goals outlined above, it will be clear that the employee is not the right fit for the role at this time. This could lead to termination of employment with the company, or, at the sole discretion of the manager, the employee may apply for other open positions at the company.      Acknowledgment of Receipt and Understanding:      Employee: [Employee's Name] Signature: _________ Date: _________      Manager: [Manager's Name] Signature: _________ Date: _________#      Now, if the employee has less than year of tenure, or has failed to meet the goals laid out in a PIP, it's pretty cut and dry. You need to let them go with as little fuss as possible. Concise, clear, and direct.      Again, HR may have guidance on how to do it. If they do, follow their guidance. Consistency is across the company is key here. If you don't have support from HR, you should likely engage a legal expert.       That said, here's some guidance for the parts that aren't about legal compliance:1. If you can get the budget and it makes sense due to your team's workload, see if you can hire and train a replacement before you let the person go. 2.  Don't expect any more work from an employee after you have fired them. Whenever you have that conversation, that's the last thing they do for the company, other than return equipment, keys, or similar things.3. Communicate with your office manager and/or IT ahead of the termination so they can be prepared to deprovision the employee during the termination call. You don't want them to have access to sensitive files or anything proprietary after the termination coversation.4. When possible, let the employee help craft the outgoing message to their peers. HR and your fellow managers will need to know the exact reason for the termination, which will likely need to be documented for legal reasons. But you can let the employee save face and say they are quitting to pursue another opportunity if they would prefer that. That said, if the employee is feeling like a victim and is angry at you or the company, you do not want to give them a platform to air their grievances to the entire company before they leave. 5. Think about the impact on your team, and how you want to communicate with them. If you have someone on your team who you are grooming for management, you may want to sidebar with them ahead of the termination. Bring them in on the decision a day ahead of time, and talk them through the process, the reasons, and the plan for what comes next. See if they have any questions, because chances are, the rest of the team will have similar questions, and this will help you prep for answering them. They can be a resource to the rest of the team when the news breaks, and they can potentially help handle any transition of work that needs to happen.6. For the rest of the team, you'll want to meet with them as a group immediately after letting someone go. Try to anticipate any questions they will have. Keep it brief and to the point, and focus on the future. That is, what is the transition plan for the fired employee's workload. Be available to answer questions, and don't be afraid to say, "I'll get back to you on that." Just make sure you do get back to them.##      There is one thing that can help with the sting of getting fired, as well as ease the difficult feelings that come with making and communicating the decision to fire someone: Severance.      The purpose of severance pay is to serve as a cushion while the individual is looking for a new job.      Severance is not legally required in many jurisdictions, including the United States, except when it is included in an employment contract or in the employee handbook. That said, it's common practice for employers to offer severance pay as part of a termination or layoff package.      The amount of severance pay an employee receives can depend on various factors such as:¥ Tenure at the company¥ Seniority at the company¥ Reasons for termination: If the termination is due to layoffs or restructuring, the severance package may be more generous than if the termination is for cause.      Severance pay is often a one-time payment, although it can sometimes be paid out over a period of time, depending on the terms of the severance agreement.      In addition to monetary compensation, a severance package might include benefits such as continuation of health insurance, help finding a job, stock options, or career coaching.       It's often used to get the employee to sign a non-disparagement agreement, ensure equipment gets returned, and generally incentivize the employee to avoid anything to hurt the company on their way out.       Something that isn't as discussed about severance, is how it can be useful to alleviate the difficult feelings managers have about letting someone go. It is common for my clients to struggle to let someone go when it's clearly time to make the hard call. I encourage them to think about how much more expensive it is for the company to keep someone who is dragging down an entire team's performance an extra few months. Why not let them go now and spend a bit of that money on a more generous severance? It will be better for everyone involved.      You may not have much control over how much severance you're direct supports get paid. But do you have any? Can you push for two weeks instead of one? Six weeks instead of four? Can you time the termination for the first day of the month, so they have a whole extra month of health care paid for? These are things that cost your company money, so don't take them lightly. But if they help you make the hard call sooner, it's also benefiting the company, while making the transition for the terminated employee easier.  #      Layoffs      Layoffs are both easier and harder than terminations with cause.       They are easier in that some of the decision is out of your hands. You aren't in the position of telling someone they can't do the job they think they can do. It can feel less personal.      They are harder because you have to let someone go who is doing a good enough job. You aren't going to be able to replace them and it's likely most of the work they were doing still needs to get done. You and the rest of your team are made poignantly aware that you could be next, unless things turn around for the company. Also, you may have to choose, or help choose, which position on your team you are going to cut, so you are still having to make a tough call.      So yeah, they are mostly harder overall.      But they do happen, and when they do, you need to be thinking more about the team that's staying than the person you are letting go. Hopefully the person being laid off is getting a decent severance, and will figure things out one way or another. It's out of your hands. Your focus is on preventing the need for a second round of layoffs by keeping your team cohesive and retaining your top talent.      How do you do that? Lean in. Turn in to the skid. Don't shy away from the vulnerability the company is facing. Be real, but be focused on the future and what you, your team, and the company can and will do to turn things around.##Chapter EightCompensation      Compensation ranges and adjustments      *not sure if this belongs in this book      There is a lot of buzz around salary transparency. While few organizations are truly transparent about individual compensation packages, there is a trend towards more transparency. Defined salary ranges and compensation packages that are tied to market data and metrics is one of the stronger and more tangible diversity, equity, and inclusion tactics available to most organizations.      Early hiring is often done without such systems in place, and each hire is something of a negotiation. As the organization scales and matures, a more rigorous policy needs to be put in place.       There are a number of products, some paid, some free, that can provide market driven anchors to staff pay. That said, there are rarely direct analogs between the company, the R&Rs, and the titles in the data. Comp leveling is useful here, where you assign levels amongst the various roles for each department, and map those levels to market salary data. The key is consistency and documentation - how did you arrive at this salary range for each position, and the reasoning behind it.       For raises, it needs to be similarly rigorous. I don't recommend tenure-based raises. Cost of Living Adjustments should be revealed by returning to the market data and updating comp ranges. Individual managers can make salary adjustments based on performance within those ranges, but anything outside of the range should be part of a change in R&R that ties to the new range. If a manager wants to give an employee a raise that would take them out of their pay range, perhaps due to long tenure, it is a useful practice to quantify the value that the greater experience offers. What capacity does it add? What additional responsibilities does a more tenured employee take on? That could be a "senior" or "level II" version of the same role with those additional responsibilities added, and a commensurate increase in pay range.      *give example      The question of location often comes up, and it's really up to the company whether or not to take location into account with salary ranges. Often there is a floor and/or ceiling set based on the percentage of the cost of living where the company is headquartered. For staff who don't travel and where location is not a factor in output, I recommend not adjusting salary based on location. For staff who travel on the company's dime, you want them close to a major hub, so you may want to consider that.##Chapter NineRemote Teams      If you are managing a remote team there are two areas where you need to think about things a little differently:      1. Team cohesion/psychological safety      2. Performance management      Starting with team cohesion:      Get used to using Emojis. Much of your communication with your direct reports is going be via text, without any accompanying tone of voice or visual cues to establish the emotional affect of the statement. The term used by academics is computer-mediated-communication, abbreviated CMC. There are studies that show that, in general, email messages and the like are received with a more negative affect than the writer intended.1 This is likely do to the lack of vocal tone, body language, and facial expression we are used to, which gives us clues as to what is the intention of the message. And without those clues, some part of us concludes things are worse than they are, in terms of the interaction. This might not be a big deal if it happens just now and then, and there are plenty of in person interactions to course correct the overall trajectory. But if there are hundreds or even thousands of instances of this sort of negativity bias operating throughout your team over the months and years, and not that many moments by the proverbial water cooler to smooth things over with casual chit chat, it's going to lead to some unnecessary conflict and morale damage.      Enter Emojis. Studies2 also show that using a positive emoji can move the perceived tone of the message in the direction of, you guess it, more positivity. If you are of the younger generation, you are probably already very used to using Emojis, and perhaps are already using them at work. Great! If you are not, start leaning in to it. I come from a generation where using Emoji's in professional communication was considered unprofessional. This is now antiquated.       	A personal anecdote: I was serving as the Interim Chief People Officer for a growing Series A startup, and our data science team had a tradition of doing what they called the "Slack Olympics" where they pulled all the data from the public channels of Slack and gave out humorous superlative awards based on how different team members used Slack. There was an award for the person who used the most Emojis. There was also a not-so-honorable mention for the person who used the least. Guess who got the not-so-honorable mention? Yes, yours truly. I was supposed to be shaping the culture of the organization, but was likely coming off as colder than intended on all my group channel messages. Meanwhile, the two staff who tied for the most Emojis were volunteer "People Officers" who I had quietly identified as key culture carriers for the org. I relied on for their contributions to team morale, tapped them to lead team building games, and they were key to organizing and contributing the offsite agenda, despite it not being part of their core function. No coincidence there.  I did some searching on the internet, and quickly found studies like the ones I mention above that told me that my lack of Emoji use was, as I suspected, hurting my effectiveness.###      See each other in person. Visit them or meet them somewhere, or fly your team to you. But get the team together sometimes, ideally once per quarter. Use the time for tasks that are particularly good to do in person. What kind of tasks are those? Not the usual ones, hopefully, or perhaps you shouldn't be remote. Do something different. I suggest work on the business instead of for it. Do some prep work to find out where the pain points are for your team. What, from their perspective, is holding them back? What is keeping them from doing their best work? Where are the inefficiencies in how the work is being done? Then use the time together to work on ways to improve your processes. But! Make sure you only work on things where everyone who has a say in the matter is in the room. Focus on what you and your team can control, not on what needs to change outside your sphere of influence. Those things will come up, notice them, even document them, but don't try to solve them. Refocus on what you can control. Then, make sure there are clear next steps, owners of every initiative, and goals set for milestones that are before the next in person event.###      Performance management in a remote environment:      Would you rather have a direct report who sits at their desk and looks busy all day but produces mediocre results, or a direct report who sits at their desk four hours per day, but produces excellent results?      I often see managers who are new to remote management struggle to know whether or not their workers are working when they say they are. The fact is, you don't know. You can't know. The good news is, it doesn't matter. The other good news, generally speaking, people work more when working remote than they do in the office.3       What you need to focus on is figuring out ways to measure if they are achieving outcomes. This isn't always easy, but that is the work. You will need to be creative, and sometimes it means adding some extra layers of verification. Done right, it can greatly improve retention, efficiency, and more.      In a recent training I did for a tech-enabled services company, a manager said one of the issues he struggled with was trainings. He didn't know how much time his remote employees were spending on required trainings, and there weren't reliable outcomes to measure. Putting aside the efficacy of trainings that don't provide measurable results or the way various software solutions to tracking training time, I suggested a quick live test as a better measure of the outcome of information retention. Again, what matters more, the time spent in the training, or if there was knowledge and skill retention? Truth is, that test should be part of the training even if it's in person, not just to test if the trainee was paying attention, but to test if the training was effective.      The truth is, relying on people looking busy in the office was never a good management tool. Yes, face to face interaction is valuable for collaboration and knowledge transfer. And yes, being able to meet in person to discuss and collaborate on specific topics is also very valuable. There are scores of other advantages to being in the same room. But for performance management, it isn't really helpful.##Chapter TenConclusion      Conclusion      Gonna write this last         <$--ENDNOTES--># # # # #      1. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/252671620_Carrying_too_Heavy_a_Load_The_Communication_and_Miscommunication_of_Emotion_by_Email      2. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/216011791_Emoticons_and_Online_Message_Interpretation      3. https://resources.owllabs.com/hubfs/SORW/SORW_2021/owl-labs_state-of-remote-work-2021_report-final.pdf?utm_campaign=State%20of%20Remote%20Work%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=180908804&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-_QqLl-7bQetJbJYOdCoskUzSr2pErrPvrTL353dUDu9e3aetTHyMlktMDf-N_opd0g0eg2lZzzzMM4MFaCkoOPa9Edt73hZO7QXJGYUaOVMIId_nk&utm_content=180908804&utm_source=hs_automation------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------